Good afternoon, dear viewers. Today
we have as a guest Yaroslav Makitra, a political scientist and
analyst of the Bunker Info Center. Good afternoon,
Mr. Yaroslav. Good afternoon, I would like to
talk to our viewers about
such a topic as the church. Yes, we have
one of the top topics now, the Moscow Patriarchate,
so what about it?  will, but I would like to
start more with the fact that Why is this Moskovskaya church actually
not a church, but an element of the
hybrid war of Russia against Ukraine,
you can place the accent,
of course.
the patriarchy, which we say so,
in fact, the Orthodox Church
was essentially destroyed in the Soviet Union
at the beginning of the creation of the Soviet Union with the
coming of the communists to power, and only
during the
Second World War, Stalin decided to put the
church back on the agenda, eh, it
pursued several tasks at the same time
on the one hand, to control society, to
keep it under control, on the other hand, to mobilize
for the so-called holy war, which
was then in the 40s and in the 40s, in the third, the
Russian
Orthodox Church was restored, a synod was gathered and it
was announced about the restoration of the
church, and so on, and the church  then it was
directly subordinated, a
special department was created, subordinated
directly to the state machine of the
special special services, and from that time, in
principle, we can take such a reckoning
since the church became Russian
Orthodox. Not against. Not even just
to be a state church there.
special services and, by and
large, after the collapse of the
Soviet Union, nothing. In this regard,
this structure has not changed,
it remained, it remained in Ukraine very much,
it was very much incorporated here.  Western Ukraine,
Central Ukraine, that is, there are many more
people than what happens in Russia, there are a
lot of priests. By the way, there are also priests of Western
Ukraine, they are now even in the Russian
Russian Orthodox Church in Russia, they
are directly there,
including in the governing bodies, and that's all the
machine started like that  to work And
already somewhere Well, like in the early 90s, like everything in
Russia, by and large, then
fell apart after the collapse of the Soviet
Union, and with the arrival of Putin, this machine
started working again in a new way, the tool
was turned on in a new way What did this
lead to the fact that a large part of the property
which in Ukraine is an important property very
often there in the center of the city, a large number of
the population and so on remained in the
Russian
Orthodox Church, yes, it is leased, yes, the
community owns some places, but due to
this, they were able to hold such
important positions, points, they were able to
attract a large number of people and
in particular, the fact that Well, if you go
into the depth of Orthodoxy itself, it
was considered canonical and which had a
certain right from Constantinople, the so-
called tomos, as it is now customary to say, and
now the Ukrainian church has already received
this so-called tomos.
moved aside, but this machine
worked and worked successfully for the
Russians, in fact, now the church is the
last, the last, the last stronghold of the so-
called Russian world, because
it also collapsed. Cultural propaganda, the so-called
show business there, collapsed, all political parties,
economic ties, political influence,
everything  covered, only the church remained,
especially if we look at the map,
it is still very, well,
these metastases are spread for them, so the Russian
World, they say very much, I repeat, very
actively in the West, especially in
Transcarpathia, but among these Russians,
church churches somehow co-exist
there as well  and the Tsar and the Soviet government, which seemed to be
persecuting them like that, but everything that
concerns the Russian measure in this Russian
Church, it takes root, of course,
it became that cement in particular, and not on the
basis of what did they manage to
convey all this Russianness there, to confirm
it is the same fact  that we repeat that
Moscow seems to have little there, that is why Kyiv does not
have it. That is, you have to pray
to God directly through Moscow.  the
Yan language in the rite is
church in Church Slavonic
Church Slavonic Although it Well, let's say it is
more Russified than it has acquired
before, in fact, it's not
because of this element, that
old age, if they were to hear that Well,
by itself, Well, the church, well  let's put it this way, we
understand what a psychological and
important effect it has on many people with
the help of such a psychological
pretext. They have been working on people for tens of years
and punching their
brains there, and that's where it was done. Well, the structure is
closed, which is very important, the state, well, one
such example, yes  they have in the Russian
current this canonized Russian tsar
Nicholas II or something like him, and I know a
lot of people even in Khmelnytskyi, I
know they all put this tsar of Russia on their avatars there, that is, because of that, it
seems that because of the images that he is
just a saint there  They don't care if this is the
Imperial in ours, it's definitely us, even
if I remember. Maybe someone remembers in
Kyiv, near the Verkhovna Rada, there
used to be a tent, a tent like this was there, which they
called a chapel, I'm
not mistaken.
that's where they
lived and sent prayers. Yes, actually,
you all there, the flag is right there, well, the royal flag, this one,
white, black, yellow, right there, icons of the
king hung and everything and they are around this
topic, there, Cossacks, Russian type, some
such pro-Russian ones formed, yes, they are probably
pulling, pulling, pulling, I agree  with the fact that
you say the thesis that there are 10,000
police Unions present there, but to a lesser extent there is
more of a network, this is the imperial story, because it is
still true to explain that the
Communist Party is good, it was more
difficult, then they entered through the topic of the
imperials, also through the tsar and so  further, but it
didn't change the point here, it was important
to leave Ukraine in the work of
Moscow's influence in the orbit of the Moscow
tests, from there they imposed singing, their
unity in the church made it possible for
staff, in fact, citizens of Russia
came here. If we even look
at the surnames of who heads which
dioceses  a huge number of people who
have nothing to do with Ukraine, they
came here and asked for the opportunity
to stop the masses in huge numbers
directly, i.e. to collect in the churches and to
carry out their own propaganda, that is, the
funding itself, that is, if you also keep it,
what is actually being sent to us from Russia over there is
this propaganda  yes, people with their
contributions are still withheld, the resulting
formula is such a closed cycle, it is so
successful, probably the most successful
project was the FSB And therefore, Well, the time has come,
for sure, the opportunity and the ability to
decide and do something with it, yes, we have
now
reached that stage Well, but I will repeat myself  that machine
worked and worked for decades, the
problem is that a large number of
citizens of Ukraine grew up right in this
church and it came to them from childhood
there and until old age
it is divided into some logical things,
but what to do with such key questions,
this is the Lavra, so that's why  what can we say now, I
use them on some dates for some reasons.
This is the Russian Orthodox Church,
or what, in your opinion, should the
state do? Yes, and what is it doing already in these
steps, well, it is difficult, you know, a
difficult question. Maybe someone will not
agree. Let's say so with an opinion and a thesis of
options  there are a lot of developments, but
for sure, no matter what you would like to
create a state church in Ukraine, you
know that Russia is the opposite, that is, let's
put an end to the Moscow Patriarchate,
but we will create our own Kyiv church, which
will also be, well, the state element did not
become the state church, the state church,
I think here this  it contradicts the constitution -
this is
already a matter, it contradicts my
confidential situation that exists in Ukraine
because there are many
Greek Catholics in Ukraine, there are many
Roman Catholics in Ukraine, after all, this certain
balance is to be preserved, it is necessary to preserve it, it is
clear that the majority of people call
themselves faithful, this is the case with the Orthodox Church
churches of Kyiv Ukraine Yes, but I
will repeat myself, especially in Western Ukraine, there are
many believers Greek Catholics,
Roman Catholics, so if yes Yes, so if
we are talking about churches there, well,
it would certainly be ideal if there was a consensus of
all churches, including the healthy
part that is  in the Moscow UOC,
they are there, and this consensus will only remain
as they do not fall under the influence of
Ukrainian legislation, which did not
violate it specifically, and they would have been able to
find some kind of compromise before the division,
not even that they wanted to beat the Maidan
out of influence, if it did not sound rude and
it was legitimized, including the
state, so that there was no bias in
one direction or another, if I'm not
mistaken, I'm bad at these stories -
but it seems like the Pochaiv Lavra, it
belonged to the Greek-Catholic church,
yes, at some stage, it belonged at all.  It's
different here, it's a matter in Ukraine, the
legislation, on what basis do they even
own the property of the church? It's either
state-owned, which are the architectural monuments
there, and so on.
when the property
belongs to the community and the community itself
disposes of it, the church in general
does not dispose of it in any way, nor does the state, if
we are talking about some families, the temple is symbolic, then they are not
included, the temple was built
there, and so on. And the community itself decides what to
do with it next, the community  according to the
statute, according to the law, one can move from one
church to another, that's the same mechanism of
division, well, the third one is there, there are churches that
were built directly there by someone, they are private
property, there is a different contact, there is such a thing, yes, in
different ways there, e-  Its different there,
but you know, if you just follow the
path of not taking into account the realities of those
territories that exist, well, we didnt want us to
fight with this element of influence by the
Russians, the FSB, the Russians, meaning the
UOC MP, the so-called Well, they didnt make points of
conflict of a different nature.  I
mean there are a lot of churches. For
example, in Western Ukraine, where the
Russian temple is big, there are
many, well, not many people say they dont
go to it much, but the temple itself is there, and all around are
Greek Catholics. There are many such villages in
Ternopil Oblast.  and when this
church will be handed over to the UOC just in Kyiv
A ptsu
when the parishioners are from here, many
may not remember in the early 90s there
were a lot of conflicts in Western Ukraine,
thats exactly what they were building, its the Kyiv one, not the
Moscow one.
I fought for
the churches with the Greek Catholics, because then there will be
separate decisions there, in particular, the Lviv
Regional Council, if I am not mistaken,
made a decision to give the churches to the
previous owners, and the Uniate Church was
very widespread and these churches were
legally recorded by whom they were built
and so on, that is, there too  one of us, so there
was a lot of conflict. They wanted
to return there, so far it is
clear that the Ukrainian churches are
visible. They have an understanding of these problems,
and this er-e vision, but you still have to
hear many opinions. You can
meet them, readers, listeners will see  where they
say let's take it and give it, well let's take it, the
state can't take and take away
even what doesn't belong to it,
I repeat very often that it belongs to
specific communities and even more so to give it to someone
in manual mode, well, that is, what is it,
how did they foresee it, but eh  This is the question,
but what should people do who associate themselves
there with the Moscow Patriarchate,
how did they grow up, as you say? Yes, they understand
this.  and that
well-known tomos is just in case,
which gives them the opportunity in their e-e
understanding of the processes of Christian
understanding of Orthodoxy to pass that they
consider themselves Orthodox. Why, because
this so-called tomos received from
Constantinople, it legalizes the Ukrainian
Orthodox Church in the hierarchy of
world Orthodoxy  Therefore, before that, they were
not schismatics by and large, and
so on, if they had not called a Russian before
that, then this thesis she still had, well, let's say
frankly, there is some kind of
right to exist, let's say yes,
at least for them, she had the right to
exist, you can  it was manipulated
because the Ukrainian church was not really
recognized, now it is recognized because of what is the
problem, on the contrary, to conduct the
Orthodox Church in this jurisdiction. The
Moscow Church cannot
be located and stay here because they do not recognize it,
so conditionally, they would
legally recognize it, but morally they do not
recognize the decision, yes, yes  they are there
they are obeying yes well on their But
why at the door but why then we have to
obey the opinion of Moscow Yes
we mean there and are loyal therefore they
can go here there there the question to We
many people have already
moved and they made this paper for themselves
What  the process of special with the beginning of a
full-scale invasion, many
communities passed so simply it
falls out of the public field because people are
busy now observing the
war there and with other things, but there are, for example, some
communities in which the priests lean very strongly,
so they set up a share of the
community against
another part of the community and  they provoke
specifically there, for example, those grandmothers
there stand at the door of the church there,
such provocations are made in order to create
such a background as if there were militants there and they were
killing grandmothers there, in short Well, of course,
they try to form a picture and do not
create it Well, let's be honest, a large
number of priests of the Moscow so-
called Patriarchate  These are just
specific agency workers, and very often
even in the state. That is, it is not a big
big secret, so of course it is clear
who they are, what tasks they perform here, they
could perform and perform
the most to analyze, even
returning to previous years, where this
nature stretches back to the 40s  years in
Western Ukraine, there were a lot of those who
were priests. Then there were the so-called
pseudo-freedoms of Greek Catholics, they were also
enrolled in the Moscow
Patriarchate, so at that time, a large number of
priests who became priests were
consecrated there in two or three months to the
Volyn School by the KGB, and this  Well,
it is called legally in a different way. Yes, and there
were a lot of communist workers among them,
or front-line soldiers, and
so on. In practice, what happened was that
people who went to church to the priest
confessed, they simply extracted
information and the information went straight.
Well, in Western Ukraine, nobody  it is not a
secret that we are the same paradoxes.
Now if we are at war with
Russia, Russia attacked Ukraine. Russia is at
war. Well, what can be the trust of the citizens of
Ukraine in the representatives of the institution that is
directly subordinated to Moscow?
No, the
Russian Church, although it is part of the structure of the
Russian Orthodox Church, you
go to theirs and it is clearly visible that these are
their structural subdivisions. Moreover, we are a
Ukrainian metropolitan, he
participates in the work of the synod and in the work of
non-Russian Orthodox
Church bodies, by the way, this is now in  the decisions of the
National Security and Defense Council are actually one of the
points
to understand in the statute and all of this
structure of the UOC, because we say the Moscow
Patriarch in fact, but they don't have the
Ukrainian Orthodox Church. Well,
if they approach it legally, we will say
that we identify that it is the Moscow
Patriarchate, they say they are and  there, they are
autonomous, completely independent, and so on,
although in reality no one gave them this
autonomy, and
they did not receive the so-called internal fauna from Moscow even there,
despite all this
manipulation.
problems, as if it is that
statehood is being shifted by the church,
we plan a lot, that is, for the state of
Ukraine, for the Ukrainian special services that
work for them during the war, the secondary issue should
be the question of the presence of the tomos, the question of
canonicity.
certain facts are established there, and what is more,
these are the established facts not of individual
priests but of structural systems, all this
organization has no right
to be here of course, of course he wanted to be there, of course, at least
there he is subordinated directly to Rome, it does
not matter who by what tomos of
Constantinople, it is not
important for the state, therefore there is no need to mix it up  because
now there is very often such a discussion,
you know, thanks to the tomos, now the
special services can do something there thanks to that, well, that is,
the service does not come with the tomos and
say We have the tomos, lets
check you But of course they usually
come in accordance with the legislation of
Ukraine and so on and must in that  in
the context of the action, that is, how is this rule,
you know, for uh, for some rules, the
politicians started starting, you dont even
know how to act according to the law, its the same as
coming without a sound, but before we couldnt have
us tomos, thats why we are now in us, that is,
no  it is necessary to mix it,
just separate one from the other, there is
evidence that the structure works
specifically, then the structure can be
eliminated. I once researched
some of the biographies of our
Khmelnytskyi priests. They often
went to Moscow then, so since 2014, I
looked. They often went to  to Mount Athos,
it seems to me. For example, they have Mount
Athos and you. Its such a recruiting base,
yes, that is, you have to communicate with the curators somewhere there, so you wont go to Moscow right
now, but hes going there to Mount Athos, so
how about you pray somewhere for a week, I wasnt there
comes with some tasks. What do you
think about our
Russian churchmen in Ukraine, are they
undermining them there, are they direct agents, or are
they being blackmailed? Well, that is, at the
expense of what keeps this structure going
in different ways, and the background is very interesting in general.
Well, yes  as if the history first a little about
what there is and how the control takes place
very often this control
takes place from the side of the state at the expense of
Well there in this case of Russia
we are talking about Russia from the side of the Russian special services of
Russia this is when we were still young at a young age
when the first seminaries were caught like that  on
certain actions that contradict us, he so
church canons, and this information
is conveyed to the person who has such information on you,
and here you have two options
: you work according to the scheme, you make a career.
By the way, yes, or you have the second option, and the
information will be made public  it is a shame
for the family for everything that is possible
and the collapse of all There hopes, someone
is one of these mechanisms, the other is
that with the help of the religious community very
often they have a preference, certain tax authorities
through them give various financial
machinations. That is, it is already under  the code goes with
money, that is. And someone directly in Russia,
directly, many directly charged, that is, they
go, well, let's say how they come to certain
bodies to work for the special services, he says everything.
to learn to send, but
if it happened to the Sumovy, and as for the background,
its an interesting story, for example,
the diaphone and it, if it was
lower, a large number of
famous Ukrainian politicians went there in general, thats why its
so certain, well, if the Mecca there, the Russians
have several monasteries or only one
that they have there  in general, everyone
goes there, i.e. the iPhone is not completely
under the control of the Russians, there is a list
of Russians there, they go to that temple, they are
processed there, he explained, he goes there to be
sanctified, after all, they
will get rid of their sins, then they are very seriously
psychological, it depends. One thing is
when it is work there  with citizens who
have less access to resources or
public administration, this is one category,
this is for those provocations that you say
organize something there and so on,
keep control so that they vote in the elections.
what is meant by
what kind of sold person are all the mice there we believe in
god we don't believe but we understand what it is that
writing sinfulness is meant not on the
seventh day for us it is possible for everyone to
find some things that we
don't want to do Well we did them like this
a person feels a certain psychological pressure there,
especially in the club about
politicians, that is, the levels that came there through the
steps,
of course, and here you find that
such an old man appears from the person's side, a respectable bearded man, he
says everything to you, I forgive you everything that is
necessary
Here, we have to bear so much here, we need a
piece of land to pray there  it is necessary and it is
necessary to fall into the psychological
addiction soup, she continues to steal,
but she was consecrated, anointed with myrrh, the
pen was kissed, and the person believes that
she is like that in front of God, but suddenly she was healed
and she became a psychological addiction that
allows people to continue to do
negative actions.
This is what you are doing. We are here, the main thing is to repent, go to confession,
uh, every
week you confess, you do the same thing,
only you bring a certain one, that is, and
for that fire, a large
number of Ukrainian politicians, people
who make decisions, have been processed, this is a
big problem, in fact, Oce  such
even Well, a direct psychological one Well, a
moral tie is not there, it is
much stronger than money there and everything
else, that is, this is a big problem,
the brain is reprogrammed, of course, it
starts to think like that Yes, of course, when it is not what it
thinks it is, it is not manipulated.
It thinks that it is  it's like he does
some kind of work for the block there, he
helps, that is, there are others, as you know,
there is such a rite. I don't know how to
call it correctly, for sure, judges.
What does it mean that
different people come there? You have a week to serve there as a
minister.
you come and it stands
there for weeks, you live like a millionaire, and there you
burn some cracks there, something is built, that it is
absolutely accepted, there is great dedication, there is
great spirituality, but repetition is the same
element for me, the accumulation of certain sins,
that is, and then you go out and do the same thing
in a year, it will come again.  That is, it is
like this. When you don't talk, stop what
you're doing. We live differently. Don't live.
How you live, you simply
get a certain indulgence. This is
manipulation, and because of that, there will always
be a network of different people. There are several
levels of influence, that is, on ordinary
citizens, people like  We are only there for you. Well,
they have the effect of calculating the state
property directly on Easter on those who
believe in God. Well, they are looking for God
as a separate category there, and well, and the
third, namely, the people who
make political decisions and so on. And
yes  then there are rich people who work
individually, including this Athos -
this is one of the mechanisms of this work, you will
keep it there, they can all
go there, they can all go to this right
temple, and not everyone can be accepted by this
father who knows best in this world.
What is being done here  well, it works, unfortunately, it
can sound for a person in those things, it does not
initiate a demon, it works, lets
take it like this, if what are the prospects of Ukraine in, lets say, getting rid of,
I will get rid of the video from
this Russian church.  the
process did
not start today, it has already been going on
simultaneously since the time of Independence,
this process has been going on. That is, it cannot be
measured from specific
dates, that is, there were different stages, it started in the
90s, when the autocephalous church was
created later, it remained
"the UOC KP Filaret appeared, headed by a man
who left Moscow Orthodoxy,
essentially three churches were formed at that time: the
UOC UOC KP and the so-called PP, now there are two: the
PTU and the UOC, the so-called MP, that is, in one of
these processes, the process was accelerated. Therefore, this process has
already  is going and you are actually entering such a
final stage, I think its
two months, well, I want to believe. It would probably be
right, cant the president
or the top leadership of the state name
any terms, so for 2 months nothing has
happened, surely some
changes must take place during those two  months, we
will see the adoption of certain decisions, what
I mean. This is either
specific sentences, specific decisions on
specific individuals and demands from
state bodies to change the statute, change
your registration, subordination, it
will be one process or the complete liquidation of a
structure like the one that worked against
Ukraine from the point of view  changes to the charter, well,
they will change it, that is, the agency.
Maybe even without Dad, of course. Well,
just now, why is this the moment when it is possible to
end this influence, if not completely,
then reduce it very much? Why, because
Russia is in an unenviable situation,
they are a glory  God yes for us, that is, what is
meant, they suffer
defeats and they are diplomatic, informational,
financial, media on all fronts, they do
not have time to cover it all and stop it, well, that is,
when you know, they will hit
Crimea, the essence will be nowhere to hit, for sure, for
sure, and that is, Russia has a lot of things  they do
n't have time, it's not that they answer,
they don't even follow through on their words, that is, they won't have time. And let's say so, it wo
n't be difficult in the church to hold back this process
and bring people out to organize, it's
not that simple, that is, it's done by a
specific person, you know how a specific person sits here
The agent even Yes, they
tell him to go and take him to where I will take him, there will be more
children beaten, they will be dragged
around the city, I will not go, that is, in order for this to happen, there
must be a certain tone
and certain conditions, of course, now they
do not have these conditions, so quickly spend if the
special service has  specific surnames, names,
and actions, to quickly work out the point of
specific individuals, or from here to contribute
so that they leave here in order to
detain them, well, detention seems to be there.
the priests, by the way, not all of them will remain
there, er, the agency is not needed, the majority
of these priests are in the villages and so on, they are
pressuring them here, these metropolitans there, or whatever they do,
and they do this, as soon as this
pressure is not there, they will move
from  by the community and everything Because, conditionally, in an
average statistical village, that father
is an ordinary man, also from
that village because of the egg very often Yes, but
this vertical is so administrative, it is
very strong in them, and all the more so I
understand that isolation took place there
because  I went to shoot a video at
some of these community gatherings, the Russian
church brought the aunts, that is, there are such
as I am just looking at, and now the
security services of Ukraine have been there for the last few weeks, they
took them, that is, it is clear
that the process is going on, and in principle, it is very  it's good
that it's not just there in words, but their
leader is like for free, but
many Ukrainians, I think, not
fully realizing how terrible this hydra is, so this is the
great world and its parts, this is the Russian
Orthodox Church, so because How is it
Carnegie So wrote that there are levels of power there
there are those types of power. There, you can take
money there to buy one thing and conviction.
That is, if you have convinced a person, then you
control him. The
Russian church
returning from Odesa is such the
strongest abonipulative and
strongest apparatus because it
really looks into the soul, that is, it works
at the level of motivation  human behavior at the
level of motivation, behavior there, well, in general,
motivational, for example, a large part of
people go to the service there on Sundays,
that is, they
have informational support,
informational contact at least once a week.
there's show business.
Okay, they just banned
Russian there. They connected Ukrainian
radio.  it is
perceived, the
politics there too, yes. If the politicians there,
especially the war with Russia, the politicians
there say the right things and
behave correctly, too,
some part of them is reoriented there.
there, if the economic ties
are tied, the main thing is that the money goes, that the
person has more of his own pockets
there. That things were going well there, the owner was
connected to Russia.  my
pocket
had a higher salary and so on. I have all these
things. They are
easier to obtain because they are not
directly connected to the person himself. That is, she is
secondary. This system of
submission to her changes and she quickly changes her
position.
there for cases, direct work specifically
on the consciousness of a person, directly on a
person, and there are rigid hierarchies there
through four or five chains and it
is accessed directly specifically into the
person himself and personal control is maintained. The
Russian Church is such a network, you know, there
is a gas pipeline, yes it is a water pipeline
We throw out an idea, a type of idea, and
shake it up. It will be interesting. The nervous
system will branch out in this way. That is why it is
the most difficult to deal with it, because what you are saying is that
a person goes to church,
communicates, prays there, plus
he believes in God there and also tells what he sees.
all their actions are directed there,
i.e. God against faith,
all these elements of
Satanism are already included there, now, by the way, here it is.
In Russia, now there is a main one, in fact, one
of the main topics is the fight from
Ukraine with Satanism, this is nosification, they are already
confused  in the terms you know Such a
conclusion or to develop a little to the side,
what is the difference between the bearish
Russians of medium static when they
roar, then you think it's devils And
he has Satan, that is, Well, let's keep in
mind that everything flies into one,
simply, into some black hole and  all this
set of words But nevertheless, well, for someone,
it is easier to work in us, it eats and
somehow it changes its behavior to an
aggressive one, it is good that this
process has been going on for quite a long time,
especially in recent years, it will speed up and there is
no such thing, you know what  people there, er,
went to church there, the first shot was fired somewhere, and
here they came, they were expelled, and so on, the
war has been going on for 8 years, and many people have already
changed their minds, including the priests, er, I
repeat, not everyone there, we will not be
noisy and call everyone what it is completely  the
structure there is just a straight network, but it
is there, but we also have it, let it be there, it may
not be noted anymore, part of it is normal,
absolutely adequate people there, and that is
why, gradually, in the stage, they will
review their principles, their visions
there, and they could, well, take it easy on this process
somewhere there  approach, it didnt happen
today, you know, out of the blue, the
searches of the Kiev-Pechersk Lavra were there, or else, this, this, if,
plus, this process went
quite so organically, yes, organically, it
came as it was immediately so sharp
from the first days there, since the fourteenth year,
for sure. Well, maybe there would be a reaction
completely different Because in fact many faithful of
this church are also fighting at the front and priests There
are even though there is no secret there, there is even a
legal one Maybe it was an
unspoken ban of the Moscow
Moscow Patriarchate there were chaplains
But nevertheless there are, in certain
situations, permits where there is an e-  Well, where is the
normal attitude of the military to them,
they are basically on the Ukrainian
side, thats why the situation is so dire there, the
church lives like any other, it
also lives in such an environment, there is no such
clear
uniformity, I just
mentioned the same thing by the way  with Islam, thats how Russia is, they are
Islamic, they are
spiritually lazy, just like they have control
over these Muslims in Russia, they have their
own RPC, but its Muslim, and its
just not very noticeable because
we haveMuslims,
even a part of them, lets say this  There was a
center. He was in Crimea, so he is now
occupied, that is, he did not have such a
large number and they are so
concentrated in a certain territory, how
compact. But an interesting question was raised.
Look, Russia has a great influence. Muslims have a great influence.
Plus Kadyrov, well, I
understood that. It probably has something to do with
Islam.  like a guinea pig To the sea
and goodbye Well, but the very fact is that he
calls himself a great Orthodox believer there, that is the
Muslim line and it is the
Christian line personified simply by
God the bear there or by someone else Well, that
is, how do they fight for Christian
Orthodox values, and I will tell you how
they  they came up with a word They together we
establish an invention that has not yet been Yes
in general Two stories of the existence of humanity
when Christians and Muslims are in common
and even there and Protestants all who are in
Russia they are all fighting
Satanism in Ukraine which threatens all religions
at the same time he simply well if for example they
heard  already on the airwaves, surely anyone who
follows or heard there has already
called some
representatives of the Ukrainian authorities as the antichrist, and all this is who
left. Well, this is actually, well,
they already have harmful dates in their native countries. They
dont work. Well, lets say it fell on
the head of an average
Russian statistician  and the Great Army And in three days, and
here is the mobilization here, the Satanists are already here,
it's all in a heap, that is, they're all in a heap, that is, they're all
from Propaganda, well, that's a separate topic, but that's the way it is,
what are your last short wishes
for all Ukrainians who watch us, and
maybe not only Ukrainians, well  and now
we are talking here, in this case, about the
topic of the church, well, first of all, probably everyone
for himself decides his attitude to
those processes, but in reality,
the most important thing is to be a person, there they
believe, a person does not believe in God, but  everyone
believes in certain values and the main thing is
to adhere to them and live according to those certain
values that help us all
respect each other live together and so
on never replace these values with
some religious customs, everything
else is a separate matter for each individual
person, but this does not cancel  of the fact that you
need to live in a human way and remain and
be a person, don't change concepts and
everything will be fine, then everything will be fine, be a person,
subscribe to the info bunker, we were accompanied by
political scientist Yaroslav Makitra, an analyst at the info
bunker center Glory to Ukraine Glory to the heroes